
D&D 5e API Documentation

Overview
The D&D 5e API is a powerful tool that allows developers to access data related to Dungeons & Dragons 5th Edition, including spells, monsters, classes, and more. This documentation outlines how to use the API to enhance a Discord app, focusing on streamlining gameplay for both Dungeon Masters (DMs) and players.

Base URL
https://www.dnd5eapi.co

Endpoints

1. Classes
   Endpoint: /api/classes
   Description: Retrieves a list of playable classes in D&D 5e.
   Usage: Useful for pulling class-specific data, such as proficiencies, spellcasting abilities, and subclasses.

2. Races
   Endpoint: /api/races
   Description: Fetches details about available races, including racial traits and ability score modifiers.
   Usage: Enhance character creation by offering race-specific details and bonuses.

3. Spells
   Endpoint: /api/spells
   Description: Access a comprehensive list of spells with details including casting time, range, components, and effects.
   Usage: Allows players and DMs to search for spells quickly during gameplay.

4. Monsters
   Endpoint: /api/monsters
   Description: Provides data on a variety of monsters, including stats, abilities, and actions.
   Usage: Integrate into the Encounter and Combat Management system to populate fights with enemies.

5. Equipment
   Endpoint: /api/equipment
   Description: Returns a list of weapons, armor, and other items available in the game.
   Usage: Use for inventory management and loot distribution during sessions.

6. Magic Items
   Endpoint: /api/magic-items
   Description: Retrieves details on magical items, including effects, rarity, and attunement requirements.
   Usage: Adds depth to loot and inventory, making magical items easy to look up and distribute.

7. Conditions
   Endpoint: /api/conditions
   Description: Lists various conditions like Blinded, Charmed, and Poisoned, which affect gameplay.
   Usage: Integrate into the Initiative Tracker to automate effects during combat.

8. Features
   Endpoint: /api/features
   Description: Fetches class features and abilities that characters gain at various levels.
   Usage: Use for leveling up characters, showing available abilities, and guiding player choices.

9. Skills
   Endpoint: /api/skills
   Description: Returns details on skills like Acrobatics, Stealth, and Persuasion, including associated ability modifiers.
   Usage: Simplifies skill checks by showing relevant modifiers directly within the app.

10. Backgrounds
    Endpoint: /api/backgrounds
    Description: Provides data on character backgrounds, including proficiencies and starting equipment.
    Usage: Enhances character creation by pulling detailed background information.

Common API Request Format

Request Example:
GET /api/spells/fireball

Response Example:
{
    "index": "fireball",
    "name": "Fireball",
    "desc": [
      "A bright streak flashes from your pointing finger to a point you choose within range..."
    ],
    "range": "150 feet",
    "components": ["V", "S", "M"],
    "material": "a tiny ball of bat guano and sulfur",
    "ritual": false,
    "duration": "Instantaneous",
    "concentration": false,
    "casting_time": "1 action",
    "level": 3,
    "school": {
      "index": "evocation",
      "name": "Evocation",
      "url": "/api/magic-schools/evocation"
    }
}

Authentication
The D&D 5e API does not require authentication, making it easy to integrate into various applications without the need for API keys or tokens.

Error Handling
- 404 Not Found: The requested resource was not found. Ensure the endpoint and parameters are correct.
- 500 Internal Server Error: The server encountered an error. Retry the request or check the API status.

Rate Limits
The API is open and free to use; however, it's good practice to limit request frequency to avoid unnecessary strain on the service.

Use Cases for Integration in Discord
- Character Management: Sync character sheets with the API to auto-update stats, spells, and inventory.
- Combat Enhancements: Pull monster data and manage initiatives directly from Discord.
- Spell Lookup: Allow players to quickly search for spell descriptions during their turns.
- Loot Distribution: Manage loot lists and automatically distribute items to players.

Final Notes
This API offers a robust set of tools that can greatly improve the quality and efficiency of running D&D sessions, especially in a virtual setting. By integrating these endpoints into a Discord bot, you can automate many of the mundane tasks of session management, allowing both the DM and players to focus on the adventure itself.
